Calisthenics vs. Weighlifting, which is better?

Welp, it depends on what we mean by 'better'. 

After years of lifting weights in the gym and then switching over to strictly calisthenics - I say Calisthenics is better...

... better at what I'm looking to improve: Endurance, Strength, and Agility.

Here's why.

Let's first define some terms.

What is Calisthenics?

Calisthenics is an exercise philosophy that uses your body weight to build strength and flexibility.

Forget the fancy word 'Calisthenics'.  There's nothing fancy about it.  

It's a bunch of pushing, pulling, lifting, and squating movements that you've already done a thousand times throughout your life without calling it Calisthenics. 

The defining aspect of Calisthenics is that the exercises are done with little or no equipment.  

The Military use calisthenics as its primary method of physical training - and the newest and coolest fitness brands, like Cross-fit, are built on calisthenic routines.

What is Weight Lifting?

Weight Lifting is exactly what it sounds like.  You lift, push, pull, and/or squat heavy things.  How does one weight lift?  There are encyclopedias full of routines that target specific muscles groups of the human body.  

Since the mid-1970s, weightlifting has become the default philosphy when seeking to build muscle strength and size.  Larger-than-life weight lifting embassadors like Arnold Schwartzenegger and Sylvester Stallone paved the way during the 1980's for weight-lifting to take center stage.

And so, assuming that our goal is to get in the best shape of our lives (i.e. lower weight, toned physique, and more muscle) which path do we take?

Well, let's start by seeing what we need to even get started?

Getting started with calisthenics is easy.  

Day 1 exercise routine:

1. On your way to the refriderator, stop, from your hips begin to sit back keep your weight back over your heels, don't let your knees pass your toes and sitdown on an invisible chair - then push through your heels back to standing position. Boom... your doing squats.   

2. On your way to the bathroom, drop to to the floor chest down and push your yourself up... your doing pushups.  

3. Before walking into the living room, grab the top of the door way on pull your chin to the top of the frame... magic... a pullup.

3. Just after your favorite show, slide off the couch onto the floor, lay on your back, keep you legs straight as you lift them both up 6 inches, then pull your knees over your chest.  Do that a bunch of times and ... you've got your ab work in... layin leg tucks.  

E voile... you just got a full-body calisthenics workout in!

Getting started with weightlifting is relatively easy too.  

Invest in a good set of dumbbells, Google some workout routines for the muscle groups you want to isolate and get to reppin'.  However, don't expect to get mind-blowing results from lifting these types of weights at home.  Building body mass using weight training requires a deeper knowledge of exercise routines and movements ranging from compound to isolation.  Plus, there is a recovery-time factor that plays a significant role when dividing up a weightlifting regimen.  You'll need to know when it's time to train each muscle or else your efforts will be counterproductive and your gains will take too long to show.

Endurance  

Calisthenic workouts cover more ground than traditional weight lifting routines.  Calisthenics is more than just working a muscle to exhaustion; its about exercising to build core and strength.

Take the example of a simple hanging exercise.  Highly underestimated and tragically overlooked.  Grab a pullup bar and simply hang.  I bet dollars to donuts that even the most seasoned weightlifter who's done thousands of forearm curls won't last a minute.  Add an L-sit to the hang, where you bring your legs up to the height of your hips, and the person will be in a world of hurt.  The dead-hang, the plank, and other exercises that require you to hold your position without moving are often much more challenging than lifting weights.  These types of training methods increase physical endurance.  Endurance can be defined as "exerting strenth for prolonged period of time."  Repeat the exercise, or rather hold the position, for two minutes and you've got a more effective workout in terms of endurance than you would have by lifting weights.  

Endurance excerices were the favored training styles of some of the strongest and fittest pound-for-pound athletes in the world, most notably Bruce Lee.  Although he did lift some weights in his of squat, deadlift, and arm curl routines, the focus with these weights and movements was always endurance over a 1-rep maxes.

3. Functional Strength 

Strength has always been associated with the buldging muscles in a "Gold's Gym" tank top.  We see big biceps and we automatically assume that person has a killer gym membership.  But calisthenics has something to say about strength as well.

Traditional weight training produces tremendous results in strengthening certain muscle groups.  Calisthenics produces amazing results in strengtening the whole body by helping you develop physical coordination and movement control.  Take the Burpee for example.  It's a squat, it's a pushup, and it's a back extension (and it can even be a jump!) -- all in one fluid motion.  The slow twitch muscles that get called in order to balance the transition from one motion to the next is a whole other type of underlying neuromuscular conditioning that is absent when weight lifting.  

Calisthenics takes balance.  By involving your whole body in the movement, calisthenics engages the motor reflexes of the brain, which ultimately boosts functional strength.  Weight lifting, on the other hand, is a controlled movement that has a lower impact on your motor reflexes.

Granted, weights do a more efficient job at boosting your force / explosiveness.  To achieve similar explosive gains with calisthenics some modifications can be made.  For example, we could include a weighted vest while doing box jumps, hold dumbbells while doing alternating split squates, or luanch a medicine ball at a concrete wall with one arm at a time.  

There a many variations and modifications one can do with calisthenics in order to target explosiveness - but again - weightlifting is a more efficient approach at targeting the explosiveness of a specific muscle group.  However, the physical coordination and movement control developed but working training explosiveness via calisthenics may give an edge depending on you're objective (i.e. knock back a 350lbs lineman or throw a devastating right cross for speed and power).

4. Weight loss

Men and woman may express themselves differently when discussing the topic of weightloss.  

Women may be more specific in wanting to lose weight in order to fit into a favorite item of clothing.  

Men may be a little more cryptic in their wanting to 'stay in shape'.  

In either case, calisthenics is undoubtedly the optimal path to achieve both of these goals.  

For women who want to isolate and tone their their core, legs, shoulders, and legs.... isometrics are amazing fat burners.  

For men who want to feel manly in their workouts, Hight Intensity Interval Training will get you in shape in no time.

Building Muscle Mass

Weight-lifting fans promote the idea that their mode of exercise is the only effective way of to build muscle mass.  Ok, so weights - without a doubt - build muscle mass, but calisthenics builds it better.

The main difference is in the approach.  Weight lifting is exactly that; pick heavy things up and put them down.  There is no other way to conceptualize this method of exercise.  

Calisthenics is not only more flexible in terms of imagination - but it also replaces the dead-weight with live-weight.  

Pull-ups, pushups, and the different styles of burpees force you to lift yourself up.  

Build an exercise routine around these movements and you not only build muscle mass - but core strength, stability, and coordination as well.  Plus, there are tons of exercises waiting to be tapped. 

Time

I can crush a full-body workout, including cardio in about 35 minutes with calisthenics.  I recently completed a 31-day challenge where I did 100 "Navy Seal" burpees every day for 31 days.  This type of burpee is a toe touch, 3 push-ups - with one leg of a mountain-climber between the first two pushups, a squat (which I added), a standing crossbody knee-up (which I also threw in there), and a jump (which I included as well).  

Over time, I went from taking almost an hour to complete 100 to taking an average of 35 minutes.

On day 31, I ended the challenge with 500 "Navy Seals" - a testament to the strength, endurance, and mental toughness earned over 30 days.  

It took me 2 hours and 35 minutes to complete 1500 pushups, 500 squats, 500 mountain-climbers, 500 standing cross-body knee-ups, and 500 jumps.

The same muscles groups can be trained more frequently with calisthenics, if done with perfect form, and yield tremendous strength and endurance.

Weight lifting on the other hand defaults to "split training" schedule.  

For example, Monday/Wednesday would be Back, Bis; Tuesday/Thursday is Chest, Tris; Friday could be hardcore Leg day, etc... 

This type of training timetable divides the body into independant groups and doesn't help it move them together.  

Most of our movements as humans living in physical reality aren't split up this way. 

Typically, we will need to carry a couch out of the back of a truck, take it inside, then run back before you get a ticket. 

Summary 

Boxers have been practitioners of Calisthenics from the beginning.

Weighlifting has its definite pros and also its cons.

An unignorable con is mobility.

You will become big and strong - but will you be able to impose that strength and size on an opponent who is raining punches down on you or will you be able to dance around long enough to deliver a counter blow?  Likely not.

And so, of all the weight lifting type modalities, cross fit has the right idea.  Calisthenics with weighed lifts for time to boost endurance.

In the end, it is up to the practitioner to specify their goals and utilize the approach they identify with the most.

If strength, endurance, and mental toughness if what you're after - then pop by the Westchester Boxing Club or give us a call @ xxx.xxx.xxx.

It's calisthenics for breakfase, lunch, and dinner at W.B.C.

Can't wait to see ya'!


